---
layout: post
title:  "Single-cell telescoping bimodal latent Dirichlet allocation (scTBLDA)"
---

BEEHIVE alumna Dr. Ari Gewirtz posted her preprint [Expression QTLs in single-cell data](biorxiv.org/) that describes her model single-cell telescoping bimodal latent Dirichlet allocation (scTBLDA) applied to population-scale single-cell RNA-seq data to identify expression QTLs.

These beautiful [scRNA-seq and paired genotype data](www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abf1970) come from Jimmie Yee's Lab and include approximately 400,000 peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 119 women with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

we extend our method, telescoping bimodal latent Dirichlet allocation (TBLDA), that identifies covarying genotypes and gene expression values when the matching from samples to cells is not one-to-one in order to allow cell-type label agnostic discovery of eQTLs in noncomposite scRNA-seq data. In particular, we add GPU-compatibility, sparse priors, and amortization to enable fast inference on large-scale scRNA-seq data.
 
 
 We show complex cell-type heterogeneity within specific cell-type labels.
  \item We identified 205 cis-eQTL and 66 trans-eQTLs in cell types using our approach.
  \item We found 53 cell-type proportion QTLs in the PBMC samples.
  \item We found broad replication of our findings in three scRNA-seq studies.
  \item We replicated 92 of our cis-eQTLs in the GTEx v8 whole blood data; 3/5 trans-eQTL from B cells replicated in GTEx v8 LCLs but not whole blood, suggesting a large role for cell-type specificity in association mapping.
  \item We found enrichment of our QTLs in enhancers using stratified LD score regression.
 
  
We use linked genes and SNPs to identify 205 cis-eQTLS, 66 trans-eQTLs, and 53 cell type proportion QTLs, which we then compare against prior studies of immune-cell eQTLs. Our results demonstrate the ability of scTBLDA to identify genes involved in cell-type specific regulatory processes associated with SNPs in single-cell data.

Our scTBLDA framework is an important step forward in developing methods for eQTL analysis in single-cell sequencing studies. Our approach shifts the paradigm of mapping QTLs from univariate analyses with single SNP, single gene to an analysis that more accurately captures both the statistical complexities and the biological models of regulation.

Code available for scTBLDA https://github.com/gewirtz/scTBLDA -- feedback welcome!

